+++
title = "Planet-Star Connections in the Era of TESS and Gaia"
type="page"
weight = 20190520
+++

# [Planet-Star Connections in the Era of TESS and Gaia](https://www.kitp.ucsb.edu/activities/exostar-c19)

May 20-24, 2019

Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics, Santa Barbara

[All talks recorded and slides posted here](http://online.kitp.ucsb.edu/online/exostar_c19/)

## People going from Penn State
- Angie Wolfgang
- Zhao Guo
- Dan Stevens

## Monday, May 20:

**Vincent Van Eylen** - What astereoseismology can do for planets.  His radius gap paper based on asteroseismology.  Also eccentricity distribution for transiting planets using asteroseismology to better constrain the mean stellar density, which factors into the transit duration (single transiting systems have higher eccentricity).  Also obliquity measurements enabled by asteroseismology.  Future for exoplanets and asteroseismology: look at more evolved stars: currently few planets detected around subgiant stars; most have asteroseismology.

**Angela Santos** - asteroseismic signatures of magnetic activity in solar-type stars.  Looking at frequency shifts over hundreds of days (magnetic activity produces cyclic variations in the oscillation properties - Santos 2018: frequency shifts are anti-correlated with lnS).  Presented results for individual stars; also, see strong relation between frequency shift as a function of age (less strong with radius).

**Jorgen Christensen-Dalsgaard** - asteroseismology overview.  Key point: stellar modeling is involved in order to go from observed frequency of oscillations of mass, radius and age.  So if our stellar models are wrong, the asteroseismic M,R are wrong.  Microophysics in stellar models: opacity, diffusion and settling (these are most uncertain and is topic of his talk), equation of state, nuclear reaction rates.  A recent revision of solar composition changed the the solution of the sound speed to be off by up to 3% - maybe a problem with opacity, particularly helium - find different He abundance as a function of layer in star for different Kepler stars, which implies different diffusion rates for helium.  Differences produced by mixing?  Can constrain convective overshoot distance with asteroseismology: increases as a function of mass up to limit of 0.15 times scale height.

**Travis Berger** - same talk as Kepler/K2 SciCon

**James Owen** - standard photoevaporation talk + Owen & Wu, 2018 results on metallicity difference between “born rocky” and photoevaporated planets (division at P = 25 days).

**Hans Kjeldsen** - low SNR detections of p-modes in TESS data. Signal is affected by Teff^1/2, observation wavelength (1/lambda), Nyquist sampling, and coherence of the signal (~ Teff^-3/2).  Kepler-10 is example of low asteroseismic SNR (revisited in 2014 - still got 2.4% error in mass, 0.8% error in radius, 13.5% error in age because of long baseline).  For many stars observed with TESS, nu_max will not be observable with the 2-minute cadence.  There is a relation between delta-nu and nu_max that can help; also well differentiated evolution in delta-nu_0 (the standard delta-nu, which is between consecutive radial modes) and delta-nu_0,2 (the difference between the l=0 and l=2 modes within one radial mode, I think?).  Can combine ground-based and TESS data to improve SNR.

**Tim Bedding** - next frontiers for asteroseismology: 1) validating the asteroseismic scaling relations; 2) rotation/angular momentum transport; 3) asteroseismology of A-type stars (particularly delta-Scuti pulsators; just off the main sequence).  Scaling relations: delta-nu ~ rho^1/2; nu_max ~ g*Teff^-1/2.  delta-nu IS APPROXIMATE but departures are well understood from theoretical models by 2-10% (White et al. 2011).  nu-max is more problematic.  Physics is less understood here; depends on reflection off boundary between convective and radiative zone in the star (characterized by the acoustic cut-off frequency), and the assumption that nu-max is directly proportional to this cut-off frequency.  So far this relation works . . . but needs to be tested.  Example of cause for concern: width of oscillation envelope depends on mass of star . . . does it do so symmetrically?  Rotation - observable through splitting in l=1 mode (m=-1,0,1); height of m=1,-1 modes depends on inclination.  Gamma doradus stars - can measure the rotation of the cores for these.  Delta-Scuti stars: rotate very rapidly, so modes pushed around a lot.  Planets found around them (Murphy 2014, 20165ab, 2018) because their modes are seen to move back and forth - like the pulsar timing detection method.  Find a period-luminosity relation for delta-scuti (with the oscillation period relating to the fundamental (n=1) mode; NOTE: these are NOT solar-like oscillations, because at lower frequency and don’t have nice envelope).  TESS’s advantage for delta-scuti is large number of these stars scheduled for short-cadence observations (not the case for Kepler).  For these observations, can assign n and l to every peak in the power spectrum for these stars - can finally due delta-Scuti asteroseismology!  Gaidos comment: Beta Pic is a delta Scuti!!  Would be great to get an asteroseismic mass for it.  Also combining with some spectroscopic data for these delta-Scutis.

**Bill Chaplin** - summary and future challenges of asteroseismology and exoplanets.  Future challenge - how low can we go down the main sequence?  What’s a low mass for an asteroseismologist?  < 1 M_Sun, but we do have detections down to K dwarfs.  Aspiration: get down to M-dwarfs.  Asteroseismic yield from Kepler: 700 solar-type stars (limited by short-cadence slots; includes > 100 planet-hosting stars) and 20000 red giants.  On the cool end (< 2 L_sun).  Need to detect oscillations with background that includes, from short to long frequency: shot noise, granulation, instrumental artefacts.  K-dwarf example: Kepler-444 (highest density dwarf with detected amplitudes).  The issue now with TESS, since we have the 2-minute cadence for more stars: low-mass main sequence stars have low oscillation amplitudes.  Note: the sampling rate of the observations really matters (especially at high frequency - Nyquist sampling issues), as does having a long baseline.  Kepler didn’t detect any oscillations of M-dwarfs because of the limited short-cadence slots, NOT because of the intrinsically low oscillation amplitude.  Looking ahead to PLATO.  Also, if large enough telescope, can observe power spectrum in Doppler velocity - will get higher SNR than in photometry.  What about brown dwarfs?  Look for binaries with a brighter primary; assume same age to test if it fits brown dwarf evolutionary models.  Done this with one brown dwarf system.  The summary - asteroseismology has direct input into exopanets via fundamental properties (density, logg) and dynamical parameters (inclination, rotation, etc.) and indirect input via improvements in stellar physics and modeling (overshooting, mass loss, etc.) and the analysis techniques (i.e. use of model grids).

**Allison Youngblood** - Ultraviolet Emission from M-dwarfs during quiescence and flares.  Stellar activity is most pronounced in UV/X-ray, because emission almost entirely from magnetically heated regions.  Even if quiet in optical, can be active in UV/X-ray.  Photospheric models of M-dwarfs under-predict flux in UV.  Lyman-alpha is important but hard to observe because Earth emits a lot of it (so from ground is hard, but come progress being made) and the ISM severely attenuates it (even to Proxima Cen, core is 100% absorbed) . . . and need competitive Hubble time (only instrument to observe in that wavelength).  M-dwarf UV surveys: Mega-MUSCLES (“inactive” Ms), FUMES (young M’s).  Key: all M-dwarfs appear to be UV-active!!  Missing EUV (100-900 Angstroms) because of ISM absorption, so need very closest stars.  So proposed SMEX 2019 mission ESCAPE to get 50-500 Angstroms for closest stars (sample of ~ 200 distributed over F-M and ages).  Flares: how does stellar spectrum change during flares?  What are flare frequencies and energies?  What kind of data products are useful for exoplanets.  Loyd 2018 - M-dwarf FUV emission may be dominated by flares.  Is same true for NUV, EUV?  Spectra: FUV flares show strong line enhancement and hot blackbody emission; NUV flares are rare.  CMEs?  Energetic particles have a greater effect on atmospheric chemistry than flare photons (Tilley 2019) . . . but haven’t detected CMEs for stars yet!!!!  Why not?  Flare blueshifts are ambigous; Type II radio bursts not detected; but maybe can observe coronal dimming?  What is it?  Emission lines that trace coronal emission will decrease during CME: CME mass correlated with dimming depth and CME speed is correlated with dimming slope.

**Ekaterina Ilin** - Stellar magnetic evolution: flaring activity in K2 Open Clusters.  We know that flaring, age, and mass are related: Hilton 2011, Chang 2015, Clarke 2018, Howard 2019.  She’s adding data to the flaring-age-mass relation using K2 open clusters (M35, M67, Rup147, Praesepe, Hyades, Pleiades).  Flare detection using ALTAIPONY, her (open-source) software.  Found cumulative flare frequency distributions binned by effective temperature per cluster.  Find: 1) flaring rate decreases as Teff increases; 2) all flaring rates decrease from 100 to 600 Myr; 3) rates decrease more for hotter stars.

**Eric Gaidos** - The star-protoplanet connection in the era of Gaia and TESS.  His summary of Kepler results: many small, close-in planets; M-dwarfs have many more of these planets; small planets are gas poor or gas rich; some *might* be habitable.  Gaidos wants age from Gaia, and X-ray luminosity over time (scatter in X-ray luminosity vs. Rossby number - is it due to inter- or intra-star variability?).  So look at young clusters within 300 pc: Upper Sco, Lupus, Taurus, NCG 2451, IC 2391, IC 2502, Hyades, Praesepe all observed by K2.  David+ 2019: planets in these young clusters are larger.  Young M-dwarfs: their pre-main sequence contraction time >> disk lifetime so no disk locking; convective turnover time is long; no pre-main sequence Henyey track, so luminosity monotically decreasing.  He’s “collecting” these young M-dwarfs: Gaia + TESS = Age (for pre-main-sequence through isochrone estimates) + Rotation period.  Also look at young moving groups - dozens of these.  Gaia is adding new members to these groups and adding new moving groups (Faherty 2019, Tang 2019)!!  TESS *is* detecting planets around young moving group stars.  Also finding “dipper” stars < 10 Myr - dips can be periodic (typically period ~ a few days . . . likely inside the dust sublimation radius!!) or episodic (i.e. not predictable) with depths > 10% and variable non-transit shapes.  Likely are small masses of dust.  Example: HD 240779 (is also a binary - created TESS difference image and found centroid over time).  With galactic space motion and lithium abundance, find a ~125 Myr age for it.  Where is this dipper-causing dust coming from?  The disk, maybe from edge of inner disk?  However, many dipper stars have non-inclined disks!!  So warp?  Also some have no inner disks at all!!  So what is it?!?!  Younger analog to Tabby’s star . . . disintegrating exocomets?  Dusty winds?  Stay tuned - is still a mystery.  Note: Beta Pic is also a dipper star (an example of which was found by TESS).
